once around Arcturus the guardian of the
bear it's a very prominent star visible
in the night sky either at the beginning
of our observing season here in
Cambridge we see it in the sunset
towards the uh start of our year in
September and then just at the end of
our observing season it pops back into
the sky around over in the East marking
the uh beginning of
so the star itself is the brightest star
in the constellation of bhes the
herdsman there and you can see it marked
on the star map in that kite shaped
constellation and just at the top right
there we have the tail of the Great Bear
sticking over onto the screen Ursa Major
um other constellations around there
Corona Borealis the northern crown
always very pleasant to see in the sky
and a few of the fainter ones like the
ing dogs canis ftii and coma barones
Beres
hair but by far the brightest object
that you will see in the northern part
of the sky it's the fourth brightest
star observed from Earth and uh beats
all the others that are north of the
celestial equator with a magnitude of z0
uh minus
0.05 in fact and it's obviously a sort
of
ready orange color been was been known
since Antiquity with people like
Tommy marking the color you can always
find it they say Arc to Arc tus you
follow the Arc of the Big Dipper The
Great Bear the sauce spin the plow
whatever you want to call it you follow
that round and you find your way to the
bright star Arc turus personally I never
have any trouble finding it because it
is ridiculously bright um and they say
that you can Spike on to Spiker now that
would be for the summer because Spiker
is quite low in the sky and um difficult
to spot other than once we get to the
summer
months so that's how to find it in the
sky it also marks one corner of the
spring triangle so again there we have
boutes with our tourus at the top left
the plow above the great be
and then below we've got the Leo the
Lion and Virgo with their bright stars
regulus and Spiker making up that
triangle so there are several ways to
navigate around and I should point out
that the moon and Jupiter being marked
in Virgo uh when this map was generated
they're not always there they tend to
move but so bright is AR turus that you
can watch it in daylight with a
reasonable size telescope if you're able
to find it
and that was first done in 1635 by this
guy John Baptist Morin very famous
astronomer and he was able to note that
you could see these objects now
sometimes supern noi had been seen in
the sky prior to this uh because they
can be immensely bright but this was the
first ordinary star to be observed in
daylight against the glare of the blue
sky and there in the image to the bottom
left is Professor Roger Griffin looking
out of the 36 inch Dome here in
Cambridge it's almost the largest
telescope remaining in the UK I think
the people in Edinburgh claim to have a
36 and A2 inch but uh we're not going to
worry about that but uh we would open
the telescope up and Roger would let
people look through it and see AR
tourist in daylight on
our observing open days that we would
have uh once a year in
March so what do we know about Arcturus
well it's massive it's a big star but
when I say massive I'm talking Loosely
in terms of size actually the mass is
only 8% larger than that of our sun but
it's 25 times the radius so it's a k
class orange giant if you want the
official
classification um and the reason for
this is that it's quite old it's 7.1
billion years years old so significantly
older than our son which is about 4.6
billion years old and so it has now
reached that stage where it's used up
the hydrogen in its core and it's
swollen up to this IM immense
size on the Herz BR Russell diagram it's
marked as ascending the giant Branch the
red giant Branch it's come up from from
the main
sequence through the orange subgiant
stage and is beginning to ascend up that
red line the red giant
Branch it's been fusing the hydrogen in
the core making helium but that's now
depleted in hydrogen and so the hydrogen
Fusion is going on in a shell around
that and it's dumping the helium down
into the core and it's going to continue
being able to do that for a while until
it reaches the tip of the right red
giant Branch star when something else is
going to happen and that is going to be
a helium flash where it suddenly manages
to ignite the helium in the core and
brightens up and comes back to the left
on the diagram before then going off
possibly up towards the uh ASM totic
giant Branch star so this is the sort of
evolutionary diagram for a one solar
mass star which Urus essentially
is now a little bit of Maths for you if
we have a think about this the heat and
light coming from these giant stars is
spread over the surface of the star and
then radiates
away and the surface area of a star is
determined as 4 pi r s where the radius
R in this case is 25 times that of the
sun you could still just look at it as a
circle and treat it as p R squ for these
purposes as the circle that it presents
to you but it doesn't matter the point
is that the ratio is going to be the
square of the radius and so 25 squared
is
625 times more area over which the heat
is emitted and there's a law called the
Stefan boltzman law which tells us that
the power output of an object divided by
its available area is a magic constant
boltzman's constant there the Stefan
boltzman constant um in units of watts
per square meter per Kelvin to the power
four very rare formula in that it has um
a fourth power in it and so it's that
magic number times the temperature to
the power four so actually a small
increase in temperature leads to a very
large output increase and we can run the
maths the temperature of Arcturus is
4,200 an 86 Kelvin and so
5772 so we divide one by the other and
raise it to the fourth power we get
303 and if we multiply the0 303 by
625 we get a number of 189 times greater
power output than our sun that's why
these giant stars are so large not
necessarily because they're massive but
because they've got a very large surface
area which is uh enabling them to uh
pour out the radiation even though their
temperature is a little less it's that
fourth power thing that does the
trick so where did Urus come from an old
star 7.1 billion years old
well the suggestion is that it comes
from a region called the thick
dis the plane of the Galaxy is marked by
the thin disc where an awful lot of
material lies but it's surrounded by
this slightly inflated thicker disc and
then we have the Bulge in the center
core of the Galaxy and the Halo stars
all around the outside and the globular
clusters which are left over from other
events also around in the Halo but the
thick disc is interesting because we're
not entirely sure where it comes from
some people have suggested that heat and
energy released in the thin disc has
blown it up and blown Stars up into this
thicker disc others have suggested that
it's caused by stars being ejected from
the Bulge from the core or from clusters
within the thin dis that have picked up
a lot of energy and momentum in uh near
collisions and being hurled out onto
elongated orbits creating this much
thicker region um and others have said
that it's actually from the
cannibalistic process where by which the
galaxy has grown where it's actually
eaten up other small galaxies that are
too close to it and I tend to favor that
latter one one of the reasons is that
since
1971 we've identified a stream of stars
the Arcturus stream 53 Stars moving in a
very similar manner so the proper motion
from our point of view is the same
across the sky but even with um the
likes of guia being able to determine
the radial velocity as well then we can
track them and this stream is a stream
of stars not moving in the plane of the
Galaxy quite so the thick disc seems to
be populated by these streams of stars
and I believe that they've come from the
capture of a dwarf Galaxy we've tracked
quite a number of these events where
smaller dwar DWF Galaxies have come too
close to the Milky Way in the past and
been captured by its gravity and dragged
in and shredded spaghettified into a
long streamer and then gradually they
merge and get stirred into the main body
of the Milky Way so I think that's
probably it the
explanation now we studied Arcturus with
various instruments looking for
companions and planets and I'll have to
say no luck yet there have been a number
of reports the hipparcos satellite
believed it had found a companion star
so that's kind of Illustrated in this
artist's impression on the right here
and some reports in 1993 also suggested
that although there was no companion
star detected they thought they might
have found a 12 Jupiter Mass enormous
gas giant planet but so far nothing has
been found
there are various studies going on
there's Astros seismology being done
looking at uh sound waves traveling in
the surface of the star and that seems
to indicate that uh there might be
something going on so watch this
space now I didn't mention the distance
and I've saved that to this stage
because it's quite close by this is one
of the reasons that we see it so bright
it being only uh a fairly modest star
although in the Giants stage so around
200 times as powerful as the Sun but at
a distance of 37 light years away so not
one of the very closest group of stars
but not far from it it is moving moving
very rapidly away from us uh sorry
across the sky and closest approach will
be in just 4,000 years so it's almost at
that now and then it will recede away
from us as its velocity takes it around
the
Galaxy that rapid motion does mean that
it zips across the sky at about two Arc
seconds every year and so the shift in
position since to's time and Antiquity
is really quite
significant but I mentioned the distance
so we've now measured it actually as
36.7 light years so 37 in round numbers
and the reason for this is that um back
in
1933 they had the World's Fair in
Chicago and there was a little
astronomical party piece which was to
use the light captured in a telescope to
trigger a photo cell and send an
electric signal from The Observatory to
trip the lights and turn the lights and
the illuminations of The Whole World's
Fair on and so uh there's a picture here
of the ticket of the president the
United States attending the uh event and
the brochure for it plus the YY
Observatory telescope with photo cell
see the cable running from it the reason
they did this was because the previous
World's Fair in Chicago had been just 40
years earlier in
1893 and at the time they believed our
tus was 40 light years away so a very
interesting little tale there of
astronomy getting itself into the news I
suppose well thanks very much for
listening and we'll see you on the next
one